Now that you've learned about the four layer Internet model. we're going to focus on the network layer.
This is the most important layer of the Internet.
In fact. to many people.
it is the Internet. Whenever we use the Internet. we were required to use the Internet protocol to send and receive our packets.
You remember that we say that each layer provides a service to the layer
above. In order to correctly use a layer. we need a good understanding of the service that it provides.
Therefore. in this video. I'm going to walk through the service provided by the Internet protocol.
IP Datagrams consist of a header and some data.
When the transport layer has data to send it. hands a transport segment to the network layer.
Below. the network layer puts the transport segment inside a new IP datagram that it creates.
Ip's job is to deliver the datagram to the other end of the Internet. but 1st the IP datagram has to make make it over the 1st link to the 1st router.
So IP sends the diagram to the link layer that puts it inside a link frame. such as an ethernet packet. and then chips it off to the 1st router.
The IP service can be characterized by four properties listed here.
It sends datagrams from end host to end host.
It is unreliable. but makes a best effort to deliver the datagrams.
The network maintains no PERU state associated with the datagrams.
Let's take a look at each one of these. in turn. as listed in the table 1st IP is a datagram service.
When we ask IP to send some data for us. it creates a datagram and puts our data inside.
The datagram is a packet that is routed individually through the network based on the information in its header.
In other words. the datagram itself contained.
The header contains the IP address of the destination. which we abbreviate here as IPDA. for ip destination address.
And the affording decision decision at each router is based on this IPDA.
The ladygram header also contains an IP source address. or ipsay. saying where the packet came from. so the receiver knows where to send any response.
Datagrams are routed hot by hot. through the network. from one router to the next. all the way from the IP source address to the IP destination address.
We'll learn more about how routers work later. but for now. it's enough to know that each router contains a affording table that tells it where to send packets next.
After it matches a given destination address. the router doesn't know the whole path.
It simply uses the destination address to index into its own fording table so that it can forward the packet to the next top along the path towards its final destination. hot by pop. step by step. the packet makes its way from the source to the destination using only the destination address.
In the datagram. you'll often hear the analogy made between how IP datagrams are routed and how letters are built routed by the postal service.
It's a good analogy. In the postal service. we put a letter into the mailbox with the address of the destination. and the letter is routed invisiblely to us. hot by hot. from sorting office to sorting office until it reaches its destination.
Neither sender or the receiver. No or need to know the path taken by the letters in the postal service or by datagrams.
In the Internet. The IP service model provides a service which includes the routing to the destination.
The 2nd aspect of the IP service model. and perhaps most surprisingly. is IP is unreliable.
IP makes no promise that packets will be delivered to the destination.
They could be delivered late out of sequence or never delivered at all.
It's possible that a packet will be duplicated along the way. e.g.
by a misbehaving router. The key thing to remember is that IP is unreliable and makes no guarantees. but it won't drop datagrams arbitrarily just because it feels like it.
That's if you believe networks have feelings.
IP does make the promise to only drop datagrams if necessary. e.g.
the packet cue in a router might fill up because of congestion. forcing the router to drop the next arriving packet.
IP won't make any attempt to resend the data.
In fact. IB doesn't even tell the source that the packet was dropped.
Similarly. a faulty routing table might cause a packet to be sent to the wrong destination or cause a packet to be duplicated by mistake.
IP doesn't make any promises that these errors won't happen. nor does it detect them when they do.
But IP does make the promise to only make these errors and drop packets when necessary.
In fact. the IP datagram service is very much like the basic personal service.
The basic postal service. makes no promise that our letters will be delivered on time. or that. if we send two or three letters back to back on consecutive days. that they'll be received in the order they were sent.
And it makes no promise they'll be delivered at all. unless we pay for a more expensive inter end service to guarantee delivery.
Really. when
it comes down to it. IP is an extremely simple. minimal service.
It maintains no state at all related to a communication.
We say that a communication service is connectionless
because it doesn't start by establishing some end to end state
associated with a communication. In other words. when we make a Skype call lasting several minutes and consisting of many IP diagrams. the IP layer maintains no knowledge of the call and simply routes each datagram
individually and independently of all the others.
You might be wondering why the IP service is so simple.
After all. it is the foundation of the entire Internet.
Every communication over the Internet users must use the IP service.
Given how important the Internet is. wouldn't it have been better to make IP reliable?
After all. we did say that most applications want a reliable. bite communication service.
There are several reasons the IP service model was designed to be so simple.
1st. to keep the network simple. dumb and mineral. faster. more streamlined and lower cost to build and maintain.
It was believed that if the network is kept simple with very few features and requirements. then packets could be delivered very quickly and at low cost to the destination.
The thinking was that a simple network could be made to run very fast using dedicated hardware. and given that the network is implemented by a large number of a routers scattered throughout the network. across the world.
If they could be kept simple. then they are more likely to be reliable. more affordable. easier to maintain. and will need to be upgraded less often.
2nd is the end to end principle.
The Endoend Principle states that where possible. implement features in the end hosts in the design of communication systems such as the Internet.
There's a well known principle called the end when principle that says. if you can correctly implement features at the end points. then you should.
We'll study the end to end principle in more depth in later videos. but the basic idea is to place as much intelligence as possible at the endpoints. in our case. the source and destination computers.
This can have several advantages. such as making sure the feature is implemented correctly for the application. and it's easier to evolve and improve a feature if it's implemented in software on end computers. rather than baked into the hardware of the Internet.
In the case of the Internet. it was decided that features such as reliable communications and controlling congestion should be done at the end points by the source and destination.
Computers are not by the network.
At the time. it was quite a radical suggestion and very. very different design choice from the telephone system. the largest existing network at the time. which was originally built on the idea of simple handsets and a complicated. feature rich network of telephone switches.
In later videos. will be studying the end to end principle as one of the important architectural principles of communication systems.
We'll see many examples of the end to end principle in action. e.g.
when we study the transport layer. we'll see how the end hosts build a reliable communication service over the unreliable IP network service.
A simple I-P service also allows a variety of reliable or unreliable services to be built on top.
If I-P was reliable. in other words. if any missing packets were re transmitted automatically. then it would not be ideal for some services. e.g.
in real real time applications. like a video chat. there might be no point in re transmitting lost data. because it might arrive too late to be useful.
Instead. the application might choose to show a few blank pixels or use the pixels from the frame before.
By not providing any reliability guarantees. IP lets the application choose the reliability service it needs.
Finally. IP works over any link layer.
IP makes very few assumptions about the link layer.
IP makes very little expectation at all of the link layer below the link could be wired or wireless. and requires no re transmission or control of congestion.
Some people have said IP is so simple to make. so few assumptions about the underlying licklayer. that you could run IP over carrier pigeons.
In fact. there's even an Internet stander telling he had to do it.
Making IP run over any link layer made sense. because the Internet was created specifically to interconnect existing networks.
In fact. that's why it was called the Internet.
In addition to the basic. unreliable. best effort. connectionless diagram service. IP also provides a few other carefully chosen services.
The designers of IP tried very hard to find a balance between providing the bare minimum needed to make communications work. while not providing such a bare bone service that it doesn't really work at all.
I'm going to describe five features here. and you'll learn
about each one of these features in later videos.
So I won't go into a lot of details here. but I will briefly describe each one so you can understand the scope of the complete IP service.
1st
IP tries to prevent packets from looping forever.
Because IP routers
forward packets hot By hop across the Internet. it is possible for the folding table and a router to be wrong. causing a park packet to start looping round and around.
following the same path. This is most likely to happen when the folding tables are changing. and they temporarily get into an inconsistent state.
Rather than try to prevent loops from ever happening. which would take a lot of complexity. IP uses a very simple mechanism to catch and then delete packets that appear to be stuck in a loop.
To do this. IP simply adds a hop count field in the header of every day togram.
It's called The Time to Live. or TTL Field.
It starts out at a number like 128. and then it's decremented by every router it passes through.
If it reaches zero. I be concludes that it must be stuck in a loop. and the rounder drops the datagram.
It's a simple mechanism typical of IP.
It doesn't guarantee that loops won't happen.
It just tries to limit the damage caused by a flood of endlessly looping packets in the network.
IP will fragment packets if they are too long.
IPS designed to run over any kind of link.
Most links have a limit on the size of the packets that they can carry.
E.G. ETHANEC can only carry packets shorter than 15 hundred bites.
If an application has more than 15 hundred bites to send. has to be broken into 15 hundred bite pieces before sending in an IP datagram.
Now. along the path towards the destination. a 15 hundred bite datagram might need to go over a link that can only carry smaller packets. let's say a thousand bites long.
The router connecting the two links will fragment the data into two smaller datagrams.
IP provides some headfields that will see in a minute to help the route of fragment the datagram. and two self contained IP datagrams. while providing the information the in host needs to correctly reassemble the data again.
IP uses a head of chicksum to reduce the chances of delivering a datagram to the wrong destination.
I be include to check some field in the datagram header to try and make sure that datagrams are delivered to the right location.
It could be quite a security problem if packets are accidentally and frequently sent to the wrong place because of a mistake by a router along the way.
4th There are two versions of IPN used today.
IPV four. which is used today by over 90% of end hosts.
It uses the 32 bit addresses you're probably familiar with. because we're running out of IP FOUR addresses.
The Internet is in a gradual transition to IPV six. which uses 128 bit addresses.
Instead. you'll be learning about the details of IPV four and IPV six in later videos.
Finally. IP allows new fields to be added to the datagram header practice.
This is a bit of a mixed blessing.
On the one hand. it allows new features to be added to the header that turn out to be important but weren't in the original standard.
On the other hand. these fields need processing. and so require extra features in the routers along the path. breaking the goal of a simple. dumb. minimal folding path.
In practice. very few options are used or processed by the routers.
I'm not going to show you the IPV foreheader and explain what all the fields do.
I don't need you to I don't need you to remember where all the fields are.
I don't remember all the locations myself. but I do want you to know what each field does. because it helps you understand. understand the scope of the IP service model.
It should help cement your understanding and make it really clear that IP doesn't do a lot.
It's a deliberately simple service. Here's a picture of an IPV foreheader. which is the most common header in use today.
I've drawn it here in 32 bit words. with bit zero The 1st to be sent under the wire.
Up in the top left hand corner.
The shaded portion is the IPV forehead.
It's followed by the data. The most important fields in the IP header are the destination I pay address. the source IP address. the protocol ID that tells us what's inside the data field.
Essentially. it allows the destination host to de multiplex arriving data. sending them to the correct code to process the packet.
If the project protocol idea idea has the value six. E.G.. then it tells us that the data contains a TCP segment. and so we can safely pass the datagram to the TCP code. and it will be able to pass the segment correctly.
The Internet assign numbers. Authority. Iana defines over 140 different values of protocol ID representing different transport
protocols. The version field tells us which version of I-P we're using.
Currently. The legal values are IPV four and IPV six.
This header is an IPV forehead.
Will see IPV six headers in a later video.
The total packet length can be up to 64 kb. including the header and all the data.
The time to live or TTL field helps us to prevent packets accidentally looping in the network forever.
Every router is required to decrement the TTL field.
If it reaches zero. the router should drop the packet.
This way. when the source sends the packet with a fixed TTL value. it's guaranteed to be destroyed by a router if it starts to travel in loops.
Sometimes a packet is too long for the link it is about to be sent on the packet.
ID Flags and fragment offset all help routes to fragment ip packets into smaller. self contained datagrams if need be.
We'll learn how fragmentation works in the later video.
The type of service field gives a hint to routers about how important this packet is.
The head of length tells us how big the hitter is.
Some headers have optional extra fields to carry extra information.
Finally. a checksum is calculated over the whole header. so just in case the header is corrupted. were not likely to deliver a packet to the wrong destination by mistake.
So in summary. IP is very important.
We use it every time we send and receive packets in the Internet.
IP provides a deliberately simple service.
It is a simple. dumb. minimal service with four main features.
It sends datagrams. hot by help across the Internet.
The service is unreliable and best effort.
There's no PERU state. making the protocol connectionless.
At this point. you should feel comfortable with what the IP protocol is. what its service model is. and how it fits into the Internet. for layer hierarchy.
If you have doubts. I suggest you rewatch this video and the one before it. on the four layer model.
You'll also find lots of good references about how how IPV four works.
Any good networking textbook will devote considerable space to explaining what IP is and why it was designed this way.
E.g. Chapter four of the 6th edition of Computer Networking. A top down approach by Coresy and Ross.
You also find a brief explanation on Wikipedia.
I don't know.